---
outlet:  'Columbus Dispatch'
date:   2021-11-12 15:01:35 +0300
author: 'Cheng, Yilun'
title: "New data shows that fewer immigrants granted asylum in Ohio compared to national average"
# type: 'Article'
# format: 'News Article'
link: 'https://www.dispatch.com/story/news/2021/11/12/ohio-immigration-court-denying-cases-cleveland-national-average/6369560001/'
---
Cleveland's denial rate for asylum cases has surpassed the national average for years, according to Austin Kocher, an assistant professor and researcher at TRAC.

It was 72% in fiscal year 2015 and has increased since then, staying around 90% for the past three years, Kocher found.

As for why, Kocher said, "it's complicated."

"It's  really hard to say exactly why," he said, but it likely has a lot to do  with the makeup of the court's judges and the types of cases they're  hearing.

"If (the docket) is made up of a lot  of people who are from countries where it's very difficult to get asylum  or types of cases where the success rate is low, then that can drive  the outcome," Kocher said. "In the case of Cleveland, my sense is that  the makeup of the court is driving a lot of this. ... In the past four  years, five years or so they've added additional judges that seem to  reflect the disposition of the administration that hired them, the Trump  administration, in terms of being very reluctant to grant asylum."

In Detroit, the asylum denial rate is a much lower  60%, which Kocher attributed to a different cultural landscape in the  northern city. 

Ohio's immigrants are diverse:  farmworkers, African asylum-seekers, Central Americans, refugees and  more. Detroit, on the other hand, has a clearer identity as a hub for  Middle Eastern refugees, Kocher said.