---
outlet:  'KRGV'
date:   2021-11-22 15:01:35 +0300
author: 'Varma, Tanvi'
title: "Report: Asylum grant rate increases under Biden administration"
# type: 'Article'
# format: 'News Article'
link: 'https://www.krgv.com/news/more-foreigners-securing-asylum-status-under-biden-administration-experts-say'
---
According to researchers at Syracuse University, a higher percentage of asylum seekers have received asylum status since President Biden has taken office.

According to Austin Kocher, a research assistant professor at Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse at Syracuse University, the asylum grant rate has increased from 29% to 37%.

Kocher says that could be because more people have access to attorneys under President Biden.

The pandemic also played a role in the number of cases that were actually heard. 

"In March 2020, we were seeing roughly between 8,000 and 10,000 cases decided a month," Kocher said. "Once the pandemic hit, that number fell very quickly to well under 2,000 cases a month."

Valley immigration attorney Carlos Garcia says the Trump administration expelled more people under Title 42, which could be part of the reason the U.S. seeing a higher rate of successful asylum seekers under Biden.

"I do believe that people are applying for asylum now," Garcia said. "Although I do believe that the government is continuing to implement several of those expulsion strategies, some cases are going through the system."

Correction: An earlier version of this article stated more foreigners are securing asylum status. The asylum grant rate has increased, according to a report from Syracuse University.